# **The impact of socio-demographic factors in household energy consumption:  Insights from Portugal**

### Context:
Energy usage within households is determined by socio-demographic factors, which are particularly important when looking at energy use patterns and efficiency, and therefore sustainability of energy use and reduction (Brounen et al., 2012). For instance, income level, household composition, education, urbanization, and  its location can affect how energy is consumed (Brounen et al., 2012; Huebner et al., 2015). Additionally, the  concern about energy efficiency in housing is motivated by apprehensions about pollution, global warming, and fossil fuel depletion, which are all important topics for achieving the goals of the Kyoto Protocol (Brounen et al., 2012). Knowing these socio-demographic factors helps form policies and measures important to prevent household energy from impacting the environment. 

### Research gap and objectives:
There is a global demand for the energy transition to planet sustainability, therefore residential areas are targeted to be the focus of future work (Tran et al., 2023). Many international studies either focus on the effect of socio-demographic factors within household energy consumption, on specific regions or lack a comprehensive view that can be generalized to different social contexts, or demographic differences (Tran et al., 2023; Wang et al., 2024). The study of Portugal’s socio-demographic structures and how this influences energy usage will help to relate this subject to countries with similar structures in fact, the *Report of Energy Policy Review* highlights the individual impact of demographic and social factors in Portugal, to overcome the challenges of energy proficiency (Portugal 2021 – Analysis, 2021). However, the research question concerning how Portugal's integrated socio-demographic structure influences household energy consumption compared to international trends remains. So, the main goal of this study is to identify key social and demographic predictors and to evaluate their influence on energy consumption, as well as energy usage patterns, within social groups, and between urban and rural regions. Finally, compare the findings with international literature and explore the insights to promote the development of targeted sustainability initiatives.

### Methodological approach:
The research process of this paper will integrate various techniques to efficiently approach the subject matter. The e-redes platform describes energy consumption in Portugal. With the monthly consumption by municipality dataset, we will understand energy usage patterns. Furthermore, we will resort to National Statistics Institute data to obtain socio-demographic data from “census”. This way, the interactions and relationships between these variables will be assessed using regression analysis (Lu et al., 2020) additionally, machine learning methods will be applied, such as random forest and XGBoost, to extract patterns not visible in the previous methods (Nishimwe & Reiter, 2021).

### Expected results and contributions:
The expected results of this research include identifying relevant social and demographic factors of household energy use and their impact on energy consumption trends. As well as taking Portugal’s case study to compare and relate to countries with similar socio-demographic structures. Therefore, this study would help in providing critical information to energy policymakers and energy providers to formulate more effective energy efficiency measures and interventions, supporting the goals of the Kyoto Protocol, for planet sustainability.
